R adoption slides (#36)
RConsortium/asa-biop-swe-wg: slides/r-adoption-jan2023.qmd

---

> title: "MMRM and ASA SWE - R Adoption Series"

Reviewer: Can we change this to the title on the website:
```suggestion
title: "Introducting the Software Engineering Working Group and {mmrm}"
```
the R Adoption series can be subtitle e.g. or date

author: "Ben Arancibia and Yoni Sidi"
format: 
  revealjs:
    theme: dark
    incremental: false
    logo: https://github.com/RConsortium/asa-biop-swe-wg/raw/main/sticker/sticker-1200.png
    slide-number: c/t
title-slide-attributes: 
  data-background-image: https://github.com/RConsortium/asa-biop-swe-wg/raw/main/sticker/sticker-1200.png
  data-background-size: 20%
  data-background-opacity: "0.5"
  data-background-position: 80% 10%
editor: visual
---

## Agenda

> -   Introduction and Overview of AWA SWE

Reviewer: let's consistently use:
```suggestion
-   Introduction and Overview of SWE WG
```
I would not emphasize too much on the ASA BIOP association (at least for the abbreviation) since we might soon also be associated with EFSPI

> -   Mix Models for Repeated Measures - Why is it a Problem?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Mixed Models for Repeated Measures - Why is it a Problem?
```

-   MMRM Package

    -   Why this is not "yet another package"

    -   Long Term Perspective

    -   Comparing MMRM R Package to SAS - Demo

-   Closing and Next Steps

## Software Engineering in Biostatistics

-   Open-source software has gained increasing popularity in Biostatistics over the last two decades
    -   Pros: rapid uptake of novel statistical methods and unprecedented opportunities for collaboration and innovation
    -   Cons: users face huge variability in software quality, in particular reliability, efficiency and maintainability
-   Developing high-quality software with good coding practices, reproducible outputs, and self-sufficient documentation is critical to inform clinical and regulatory decisions

## How to deal with these issues?

> -   To deal with the issues of statistical quality assurances for R packages and creating high quality statistical software a group came together to create through the ASA called the "Software Engineering Working Group" SWE WG to look R packages from a statistical point of view

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   To deal with the issues of statistical quality assurances for R packages and creating high quality statistical software a group came together to create through the "Software Engineering Working Group" (SWE WG) to look R packages from a statistical point of view
```
plus consider breaking down into several bullets / or remove bullet (if it is just one bullet)

> ## ASA BIOP Software Engineering working group (SWE WG)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Software Engineering working group (SWE WG)
```

-   An official working group of the ASA Biopharmaceutical Section
-   Formed in August 2022
-   Cross-industry collaboration with more than 30 members from over 20 organizations
-   Home page at [rconsortium.github.io/asa-biop-swe-wg](https://rconsortium.github.io/asa-biop-swe-wg)

## Goals

-   **Primary Goal**: Collaborate to engineer R packages that implement important statistical methods to fill in critical gaps

-   **Secondary Goal**: Develop and disseminate best practices for engineering high-quality open-source statistical software

## SWE WG Activities

-   First R package `mmrm` was published on CRAN in October 2022 and updated in December
    -   We aim to estabilish this package as a new standard for fitting mixed models for repeated measures (MMRM)
    -   We have been developing and adopting best practices for software in the `mmrm` package, and open sourced it at [github.com/openpharma/mmrm](https://github.com/openpharma/mmrm)
    -   Currently under active development to add more features

> ## WHY MMRM?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why do we need a package for MMRM?
```

-   Mixed Models for Repeated Measures (MMRM) is a popular choice for analyzing longitudinal continuous outcomes in randomized clinical trials
-   No great R Package - initially though that the MMRM problem was solved by using a combination of `lme4` and `lmerTest`

> -   Learned that this approach failed on Ophthalamology data (slow, did not converge

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Learned that this approach failed on large data sets (slow, did not converge)
```

-   `nlme` does not give Satterthwaite adjusted degrees of freedom, has convergence issues, and with `emmeans` it is only approximate
-   tried to extend `glmmTMB` to calculate Satterthwaite adjusted degrees of freedom

> ## Idea

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Idea with some Details
```

> 

Reviewer: I would suggest before this slide show the one from R Govys: https://github.com/RConsortium/asa-biop-swe-wg/blob/main/slides/r-govys-jan2023.qmd#L90

Reviewer 2: incorporated feedback

-   We only want to fit a fixed effects model with a structured covariance matrix for each subject
-   The idea is then to use the Template Model Builder (`TMB`) directly - as it is also underlying `glmmTMB` - but code the exact model we want
-   We do this by implementing the log-likelihood in `C++` using the `TMB` provided libraries

## Advantages of `TMB`

-   Fast `C++` framework for defining objective functions (`Rcpp` would have been alternative interface)
-   Automatic differentiation of the log-likelihood as a function of the variance parameters
-   We get the gradient and Hessian exactly and without additional coding
-   This can be used from the R side with the `TMB` interface and plugged into optimizers

## What's next with {mmrm} and SWE WG

-   Prepare public training materials to disseminate best practice for software engineering in the Biostatistics community
    -   At the beginning of February, a face-to-face workshop will take place in Basel, Switzerland with a focus on open-source software for clinical trials
    -   Organize conference sessions with a focus on statistical software engineering at CEN, JSM and ASA/FDA Workshop

>     -   Video clips in preparation with a focus on best practices for software engineering

Reviewer: from the flow, this should go after the demo I think.

Reviewer 2: incorporated in latest push

## Why it's not just another package

-   Ongoing maintenance and support from the pharmaceutical industry that is supported by American Statistical Association
-   Package is part of the mission, but to emphasize our goal is to push out information on practices for engineering high-quality open-source statistical software

## Long term perspective

-   Software engineering is a critical competence in producing high-quality statistical software
-   A lot of work need to be done regarding the establishment, dissemination and adoption of best practices for engineering open-source software

> -   Improving the way software engineering is done will help improve the efficiency, reliability and innovation within Biostatistics

Reviewer: also this should go after the package demo.

## Comparing SAS and R

> To run an mmrm model in SAS it is recommended to use either the PROC MIXED or PROC GLM procedures. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run an MMRM model in SAS it is recommended to use either the PROC MIXED or PROC GLM procedures. 
```

`PROC MIXED`
:::
:::

::: columns
::: {.column width="50%"}
- [Homepage](https://openpharma.github.io/mmrm/main/index.html)
- [Usage](https://openpharma.github.io/mmrm/main/articles/introduction.html)
- [Estimation](https://openpharma.github.io/mmrm/main/articles/algorithm.html)
- [Covariance Structures](https://openpharma.github.io/mmrm/main/articles/covariance.html)
- Degrees of Freedom [KR](https://openpharma.github.io/mmrm/main/articles/kenward.html)/[Satterthwaite](https://openpharma.github.io/mmrm/main/articles/satterthwaite.html)
:::
::: {.column width="50%"}
- [Homepage](https://documentation.sas.com/doc/en/pgmsascdc/9.4_3.4/statug/statug_mixed_toc.htm)
- [Usage](https://documentation.sas.com/doc/en/pgmsascdc/9.4_3.4/statug/statug_mixed_examples02.htm)
- [Theory](https://documentation.sas.com/doc/en/pgmsascdc/9.4_3.4/statug/statug_mixed_details01.htm)
- [Covariance Structures](https://documentation.sas.com/doc/en/pgmsascdc/9.4_3.4/statug/statug_mixed_syntax14.htm#statug.mixed.repeatedstmt_type)
- [Degrees of Freedom](https://documentation.sas.com/doc/en/pgmsascdc/9.4_3.4/statug/statug_mixed_syntax10.htm#statug.mixed.modelstmt_ddfm)
:::
:::

## Unit Testing

> One major advantage of the `{mmrm}` over `PROC MIXED` is that the unit testing in `{mmrm}` is transparent. It uses the `{testthat}` framework with `{covr}` to communicate the testing coverage. Unit tests can be found in the GitHub repository under [./tests](https://github.com/openpharma/mmrm/tree/main/tests/testthat).

Reviewer: As discussed yesterday, I would put here something around integration tests comparing to SAS results, with typical relative tolerance of 10^-3

- SAS has 14 spatial covariance structures compared to the spatial exponential one available in mmrm.
:::

::: {.column width="40%"}
:::{.callout-tip}
For users that need more structure `{mmrm}` is easily extensible via [feature requests](https://github.com/openpharma/mmrm/issues/new?assignees=&labels=enhancement&template=feature_request.md&title=) in the GitHub repository.
:::
![](https://media.giphy.com/media/3o7ZeTmU77UlPyeR2w/giphy.gif)
:::
:::

##  Covariance structures details

|       Covariance structures                   | `{mmrm}`   |  `PROC MIXED`  |
|:----------------------------------------------|:------------:|:-----:|
|     Unstructured (Unweighted/Weighted)        |     X/X      |  X/X  |
|     Toeplitz (hetero/homo)      |     X/X      |  X/X  |
| Compound symmetry (hetero/homo) |     X/X      |  X/X  |
|  Auto-regressive (hetero/homo)  |     X/X      |  X/X  |
|  Ante-dependence (hetero/homo)  |     X/X      |  X    |
|        Spatial exponential      |     X        |  X    |

## Degrees of Freedom Methods

|       Method     |  `{mmrm}`      | `PROC MIXED` |
|:---------------- |:----------:|:---:|
|       Contain         |     X*     |  X  |

> |       Between/Within  |     X     |  X  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|       Between/Within  |     X*     |  X  |
```
because not yet in the mmrm package

|:---------------------------|:--------:|:------------:|
| Contain                    |   X\*    |      X       |
| Between/Within             |   X\*    |      X       |
| Residual                   |   X\*    |      X       |
| Satterthwaite              |    X     |      X       |
| Kenward-Roger              |    X     |      X       |
| Kenward-Roger (Linear)\*\* |    X     |      X       |

\*Available through the `emmeans` package.

\*\*This is not equivalent to the KR2 setting in `PROC MIXED`

## Contrasts/LSMEANS

Contrasts and LSMeans estimates are available in `mmrm` using

::: columns
::: {.column width="70%"}
-   `mmrm::df_1d`, `mmrm::df_md`
-   S3 method that is compatible with `emmeans`
-   LS means difference can be produced through emmeans (`pairs` method)
-   Degrees of freedom method is passed from `mmrm` to `emmeans`
-   By default `PROC MIXED` and `mmrm` do not adjust for multiplicity, whereas `emmeans` does.
:::

::: {.column width="30%"}
::: callout-note
These are comparable to the [LSMEANS](https://documentation.sas.com/doc/en/pgmsascdc/9.4_3.4/statug/statug_mixed_syntax08.htm) statement in `PROC MIXED`.
:::
:::
:::

> ## SWEWG Long Term Perspective

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## SWE WG Long Term Perspective
```

-   Software engineering is a critical competence in producing high-quality statistical software

> -   A lot of work need to be done regarding the establishment, dissemination and adoption of best practices for engineering open-source software

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   A lot of work needs to be done regarding the establishment, dissemination and adoption of best practices for engineering open-source software
```

-   Improving the way software engineering is done will help improve the efficiency, reliability and innovation within Biostatistics

## What's next with {mmrm} & SWEWG

-   Prepare public training materials to disseminate best practice for software engineering in the Biostatistics community
    -   At the beginning of February, a face-to-face workshop will take place in Basel, Switzerland with a focus on open-source software for clinical trials
    -   Organize conference sessions with a focus on statistical software engineering at CEN, JSM and ASA/FDA Workshop

>     -   Video clips in preparation with a focus on best practices for software engineering

Reviewer: can you please link to the Youtube playlist already: 
```suggestion
    -   Video series on best practices for software engineering ([link](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL848NFA2PWgCR35n02yn1ZV7JqSu3NMxS))
```

> ## New packages SWE is Working On

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## New packages SWE WG is Working On
```
